Use the list of questions below to check an apartment before you rent:

**Examine the building/unit:**

- Is the entryway adequately lit?
- Does it have a lock or other security provisions?
- How are deliveries handled?
- Where are the fire exits located, and are fire doors alarmed?
- Does the unit’s entry door have a deadbolt lock? A security chain?
- Are there signs of insects, mice, or rats (such as traps, droppings, etc.) present?
- Can you hear neighbors above, below, or on either side of you?
- Is there a fire escape or secondary exit from the unit?
- Do all the switches and outlets work?
- Can the windows be opened, closed, and locked easily? (Check to make sure they are secure.)
- Are windows that can allow easy access to intruders equipped with security bars?
- Are the floors clean, or do they have water stains indicating previous leaks?
- Do the ceilings have any water stains indicating previous leaks?
- Are the walls cracked or peeling?
- Are the walls free of dents and holes other than small nail holes?
- Are there enough fixtures for adequate light?
- Are the plumbing fixtures in good working order and reasonably clean?
- How does the hot water supply seem?
- Is there sufficient storage, such as a linen closet or medicine cabinet?
- Does the entire building have central air?
- Is the stove in good working order and reasonably clean?

**When talking with the landlord, consider the following:**

- Is there an emergency phone number in case of utility problems, leaks, or other urgent maintenance issues?
- Are there separate meters for individual units? If not, are tenants charged for these utilities?
- Do tenants have access to the circuit breakers in case of a small power outage, or are maintenance personnel available to flip circuits on short notice?
- Who controls the temperature in the building?
- Where is the trash or recycling to be placed, and is it put out by the landlord or tenants?
- Do you pay extra for items such as utilities, storage space, air conditioning, parking, master TV antenna connection, installation of special appliances, late payment of rent, etc.?
- Is there an automatic renewal clause?
- Whenever possible, always try to interview current tenants. Ask them about things such as maintenance requests, heating and A/C, structural problems, parking, laundry facilities, etc.

This information was created by Baltimore Neighborhoods, Inc., a local non-profit organization seeking justice in housing.